RAW:
Amidst this pandemic period, students are being educated through online education platforms on
smartphones and other similar devices. Many underprivileged children are unable to get access
to such devices. Also, the people who are willing to help aren’t able to reach the needy due to
lockdown. The ultimate aim of this system is to help such children by giving the collected devices
from the people who were willing to help them. This system requests the donors to enter the details
regarding the device they are willing to donate. It also requests the address details of the donor in
order to reach them. On successful entry of such details, the user has to wait for the approval of
the device. The admin has to verify the details of the device and assign it to a pickup executive for
collection. This system also allows the volunteers to join the team. So that they could be helped by
picking up the devices in their locality (Figures 18.1–18.12).


PARAPHRASE:
During the pandemic period, online education is conducted through smartphones and similar devices. Many underprivileged children do not have access to such devices. At the same time, individuals who are willing to donate devices face difficulty in reaching the needy due to lockdown restrictions.

This system is designed to collect devices from donors and distribute them to underprivileged children. Donors are required to enter details about the device they wish to donate along with their address information. After submitting the details, the donor must wait for approval.

The admin verifies the device details and, upon approval, assigns a pickup executive to collect the device. If the device does not meet verification requirements, it is rejected. The system also allows volunteers to join and assist in collecting devices within their locality.

Functionalities

Donor registration

Entering device and contact details

Device verification

Approval or rejection

Assignment to pickup executive

Device collection

Volunteer participation