RAW:
This case study is helpful to people who forget their mobile phones at home as a part of their
busy daily routines. Keeping tick of essentials in this fast-paced life sometimes turns out to be
quite demanding. People sometimes forget their phones at home. What if we need to make an
important call and we don’t remember the contact number? Sometimes our phones just get disap-
peared and the scariest part is when the phone is put on silent mode. We sometimes want to lock
our phones when they aren’t around us. Need to know the exact location of your phone? Therein
comes the use of ‘My Helper’. The solutions to all the problems stated above can be solved easily
and very quickly if u have the application ‘My Helper’ pre-installed on your phone and u have
completed configuring the app. All you need to do is just send an SMS to your mobile number
from any phone that you have access to…and there goes your problem solved. The scope of this
system is increasing every day across the entire world where everything is happening at the speed
of a Formula 1 Car on a race track. The objective of this system is to provide help to people facing
these types of problems instantly with the help of advanced technology. The alluring features of
this system are Remote Access without the Internet, Track your phone through an SMS, Hassle-
Free as no OTP and ID PASSWORD is required and an SMS can help you change the sound
profile of your phone (silent to normal) without Internet. The system is user friendly and the appli-
cation will be available to even basic smartphones (Figures 12.1–12.8).

PARAPHRASE:
My Helper is a mobile application intended to help people in situations where they 
forget their phone at home, lose their phone, keep it on silent, or need to lock/locate
it when it is not nearby. If the application is pre-installed and configured, the user 
can send an SMS to their own phone number from any accessible phone to trigger the required 
help action. The system focuses on providing instant support using SMS-based remote access
without requiring internet connectivity. Key features include remote access without internet,
tracking the phone through SMS, operating without OTP/ID-password, and changing the phone’s 
sound profile (silent to normal) via SMS. The application is intended to be user-friendly 
and usable even on basic smartphones.