Research Methodology 
 
3.1 Introduction 
This chapter presents the research methodology for investigating the automatic generation of 
UML State Transition Diagrams (STDs) from natural language requirements using Large 
Language Models (LLMs). The study adopts a comparative and modeling-oriented experimental 
design. 
Unlike purely NLP-focused evaluations, this research prioritizes structural correctness, 
behavioral completeness, and modeling consistency. The methodology integrates structured 
prompting, retrieval augmentation, graph-based validation, and an ensemble refinement 
mechanism to improve reliability. 
The study evaluates whether smaller open-source LLMs, when enhanced with engineering 
techniques, can approach or surpass a proprietary GPT-4o baseline in behavioral modeling 
tasks. 
 
3.2 Problem Description 
3.2.1 Research Objective 
The objective of this research is twofold: 
1.​ To compare the performance of proprietary and open-source LLMs in generating state 
transition diagrams from natural language requirements. 
2.​ To design and evaluate a reliability-enhanced framework that improves modeling 
correctness, structural validity, and stability in open-source LLM outputs. 
The study aims to determine whether structured prompting and validation techniques can 
compensate for model size differences in behavioral modeling tasks. 
 
3.2.2 Scope 
The research focuses exclusively on: 

●​ UML State Transition Diagrams 
●​ Prompt-based inference (no model fine-tuning) 
●​ Structured JSON output 
●​ Graph-based structural validation 
●​ Comparative and ablation-based evaluation 
The study does not include: 
●​ Hierarchical or nested state machines 
●​ Formal model checking 
●​ Training or fine-tuning of model weights 
 
3.3 Dataset Construction 
3.3.1 Dataset Source 
The dataset consists of 50 requirement–diagram pairs collected from software engineering 
textbooks and academic case studies. Each state diagram is paired with its corresponding 
natural language behavioral description. 
 
3.3.2 Complexity Distribution 
The dataset is categorized into three complexity levels: 
●​ 15 simple systems (2–3 states) 
●​ 20 medium systems (4–7 states) 
●​ 15 complex systems (8+ states) 
This distribution enables performance analysis across increasing behavioral complexity. 
 
3.3.3 Ground Truth Construction Policy 
Each diagram is manually converted into structured JSON format following a strict canonical 
schema: 
{ 
  "states": [], 
  "initial_state": "", 
  "final_states": [], 

  "transitions": [ 
    {"from": "", "event": "", "to": ""} 
  ] 
} 
 
Conversion rules: 
●​ Exactly one initial state must be defined. 
●​ State names are normalized (trimmed, consistent casing). 
●​ Duplicate transitions are removed. 
●​ Self-loops are included only if explicitly shown. 
●​ Composite states are flattened. 
●​ Only explicitly drawn transitions are included. 
All ground-truth models are validated using automated structural checks before 
experimentation. 
 
3.4 Experimental Design 
3.4.1 Model Groups 
Proprietary Baseline 
●​ Model: GPT-4o 
●​ Configuration: Zero-shot only 
●​ Evaluated on a balanced subset of 30 samples to control cost 
Open-Source Models 
1.​ Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct 
2.​ Llama 3.1-8B-Instruct 
Each open-source model is evaluated under five configurations: 
1.​ Zero-shot 
2.​ Few-shot 
3.​ Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) 
4.​ RAG + Structural Validation 
5.​ RAG + Validation + Generator–Critic–Repair Ensemble 
Total configurations: 11 

 
3.5 LLM Configuration 
3.5.1 Deployment Environment 
Experiments are conducted using: 
●​ Local GPU: NVIDIA RTX 3060 
●​ Kaggle GPU (T4) when required 
●​ Inference framework: HuggingFace Transformers / Ollama 
●​ Quantization: 4-bit for open-source models 
 
3.5.2 Inference Parameters 
All models use consistent decoding settings: 
●​ Temperature: 0.2 
●​ Top-p: 0.9 
●​ Max new tokens: 1024 
●​ Repetition penalty: 1.05 
Each configuration is executed three times per requirement to evaluate output stability. 
 
3.6 Prompt Engineering 
3.6.1 Output Schema Enforcement 
All models are instructed to return strictly valid JSON conforming to the predefined schema. 
Outputs not conforming to the schema are rejected. 
 
3.6.2 Zero-Shot Prompt 
Models receive: 
●​ Task instruction 
●​ Strict schema definition 
●​ No examples 

 
3.6.3 Few-Shot Prompt 
Three annotated examples (simple, medium, complex) are included prior to the target 
requirement. 
 
3.6.4 Retrieval-Augmented Generation 
RAG configuration: 
●​ Embedding model: all-MiniLM-L6-v2 
●​ Vector store: FAISS 
●​ Similarity metric: cosine similarity 
●​ Top-k retrieval: 3 
Retrieved examples are appended to the prompt context. 
 
3.7 Structural Validation Layer 
Generated outputs undergo automated validation: 
1.​ Schema conformity 
2.​ State reference integrity 
3.​ Single valid initial state 
4.​ Duplicate transition detection 
5.​ Reachability analysis using DFS 
6.​ Transition completeness consistency 
Outputs failing validation are either rejected or passed to repair stage. 
 
3.8 Generator–Critic–Repair Ensemble 
The ensemble pipeline consists of: 
1.​ Generator produces candidate JSON. 
2.​ Critic identifies structural and semantic inconsistencies. 
3.​ Repair stage revises JSON based on requirement evidence. 

4.​ Final validation applied before acceptance. 
This iterative refinement aims to reduce hallucination and improve structural reliability. 
 
3.9 Ablation Study 
An ablation study is conducted on the best-performing open-source model to quantify the 
contribution of each architectural component. 
The following variants are evaluated: 
1.​ Full system (RAG + Validation + Ensemble) 
2.​ Without Ensemble 
3.​ Without Validation 
4.​ Without RAG 
5.​ Few-shot only 
6.​ Zero-shot baseline 
Performance degradation is measured across semantic and structural metrics to determine 
component importance. 
 
3.10 Evaluation Metrics 
Evaluation prioritizes modeling correctness. 
3.10.1 Semantic Accuracy 
●​ State Precision / Recall / F1 
●​ Transition Precision / Recall / F1 
 
3.10.2 Structural Validity 
●​ Percentage of outputs passing validation 
●​ Reachability ratio 
●​ Duplicate transition rate 
 

3.10.3 Hallucination Rate 
●​ Unsupported states / total states 
●​ Unsupported transitions / total transitions 
 
3.10.4 Completeness 
●​ Missing transition rate 
 
3.10.5 Stability 
Standard deviation of F1 across three runs. 
 
3.10.6 Complexity-Based Analysis 
Metrics reported separately for simple, medium, and complex systems. 
 
3.10.7 Human Expert Evaluation 
In addition to automated semantic and structural metrics, a qualitative human evaluation is 
conducted to assess modeling adequacy and interpretability. 
Evaluator Profile 
Two independent evaluators with background in software engineering and UML modeling review 
a subset of generated diagrams. Evaluators are not informed of the model or prompting strategy 
used to generate each diagram to avoid bias. 
 
Evaluation Subset 
Human evaluation is performed on a balanced subset of 20 requirement–diagram pairs, 
including: 
●​ 7 simple systems​
 

●​ 7 medium systems​
 
●​ 6 complex systems​
 
For each requirement, diagrams were generated by: 
●​ GPT-4o (zero-shot)​
 
●​ Best-performing open-source configuration​
 
●​ Open-source zero-shot baseline​
 
are evaluated. 
 
Evaluation Criteria 
Each diagram is rated on a 5-point Likert scale across the following dimensions: 
1.​ Behavioral Correctness​
 
○​ Does the diagram accurately reflect the requirement behavior?​
 
2.​ Completeness​
 
○​ Are all major states and transitions represented?​
 
3.​ Structural Soundness​
 
○​ Is the state machine logically coherent and well-formed?​
 
4.​ Clarity and Interpretability​
 
○​ Is the diagram easy to understand and unambiguous?​
 
 
Scoring Method 
For each dimension: 

●​ 1 = Very Poor​
 
●​ 2 = Poor​
 
●​ 3 = Acceptable​
 
●​ 4 = Good​
 
●​ 5 = Excellent​
 
The final score per diagram is computed as the average across evaluators and dimensions. 
Inter-rater agreement is measured using Cohen’s kappa (or correlation coefficient) to ensure 
reliability. 
 
3.11 Experimental Procedure 
For each requirement: 
1.​ Apply GPT-4o zero-shot (subset only). 
2.​ Apply all five configurations to Qwen. 
3.​ Apply all five configurations to Llama. 
4.​ Validate outputs. 
5.​ Compute semantic and structural metrics. 
6.​ Average across three runs. 
7.​ Perform a statistical comparison. 
 
3.12 Summary 
This methodology establishes a reproducible and modeling-focused framework for evaluating 
LLM-driven generation of UML state transition diagrams. The experimental design integrates 
model comparison, structured reliability mechanisms, and ablation analysis to determine 
whether engineering techniques can enable smaller open-source models to achieve competitive 
behavioral modeling performance relative to a proprietary baseline. 
 
 

 
 
 
