Example 36 
Domain: Book Bank Management System 
Book: UML Diagramming A Case Study Approach by Suriya Sundaramoorthy (Page 377) 
Original Requirement  
The book bank management is a software in which a member can register themselves and 
then he can borrow books from the book bank or the members can buy the books from the 
book bank. 
A Book Bank lends books and magazines to member, who is registered in the system. It mainly 
concentrates on providing the book for authorized members only. A member can reserve a book 
or magazine that is not currently available in the book bank, so that when it is returned or pur- 
chased by the book bank, that person is notified. The book bank can easily create, replace and 
delete information about the titles, members and reservations from the system. The main issue of 
the system is that only registered members can lend the book from the book bank. In the case of 
lending, we should maintain the database for the status and issue of the book and also we have to 
calculate the fine amount with respect to the due date. We should maintain the book according 
to the department, generals, and year of study. Another main issue of the system is that if the user 
takes the book and misplace it on another shelf, then we have the chip of bar scanner to scan the 
books and indicate to the admin that the book has been replaced. All the above issues will be satis- 
fied by developing the software as a user-friendly system. The main functionality of the system is 
that Sign in, Login, Log out, Book storing, Book retrieval, Book for buying, Stock Updating, Due 
fine, E-books, Payment, Book maintenance, Sales report, User records and Sorting. If the soft- 
ware is not developed, the members will affect based on criteria like the book is not in stock, the 
book is not arranged in order and maintenance will be more. The software is developed to satisfy 
the needs according to the members. The software will be very useful in the area of institutions, 
libraries and for general citizens. The software is developed to act as a useful interface for the users 
to easily access books 
Original Diagram Screenshot 
 
