Example 29 
Domain: E-Visa Processing and Follow-Up System 
Book: UML Diagramming A Case Study Approach by Suriya Sundaramoorthy  (Page 313) 
Original Requirement  
A visa is a document issued by a country giving a certain individual permission to enter a country 
for a given period of time for certain purposes. It is received after several verifications through 
offline mode. It requires the applicant to go to the Passport Verification Centre for the verification 
of documents. Sometimes even the cost of getting the visa will be high as there may be middlemen 
involved in it. It takes anywhere from two weeks to two months to receive the visa if applied in 
offline mode. With the use of an online visa processing system, the middlemen entry in getting 
the visa gets reduced and the process of application of visa becomes easier. The overall aim of the 
system is that the applicant can apply for the visa from anywhere and at any time. The applicant 
can apply for the visa and submit it online. It provides more flexibility to the applicant compared 
to the existing system. There are certain types of visas that the applicant can apply for such as 
employment visa, study visa, resident visa, H1 visa, business visa, etc. People who apply for the visa 
for work, education, etc will be benefitted a lot from this system. The applicant should register by 
providing a valid email and a password. The applicant has to log in to apply for the visa. The cre- 
dentials are checked for correctness and the applicant to allow to log in. Once the applicant logs in, 
he/she will be shown the application form which asks the applicant to provide the necessary details 
and asks him/her to attach the necessary documents. It also provides a list of visas to choose from. 
He/she can also view the details of fair to visa for each country. The applicant can view, modify 
and delete the details applied. The system will have a provision for the administrator to view the 
details of what types of visas are required by the applicant. The administrator will also be able to 
update and delete the details of the applicants. The administrator will have a facility to interact 
with the Visa Consultant Officer. The Visa Consultant Officer can be able to view and check the 
document proofs (valid passport, Demand Draft Visa Fee I-20 form, letter of admission, aid letter, 
etc.) submitted by the applicant and can be able to view the purpose of application of visa. He/She 
has the authority to accept/reject the visa application applied by the applicant (Figures 30.1–30.9). 
Original Diagram Screenshot 
 
