Example 02 
Domain: Inventory Management System​
Book: UML Diagramming A Case Study Approach by Suriya Sundaramoorthy (Page 39) 
Original Requirement  
The current inventory system is difficult to maintain due to the difficulty in searching and retriev- 
ing products, cost of material, human errors, less data integrity, and feasible loss of records and 
retrieving files. So there is a need to create robust inventory management software that ensures 
a reduction in customer’s complaints as well as the reduction in inventory cost. The demand for 
goods accrues from the growing population. To meet these demands, the inventory managers and 
salespersons require an application with on-demand information retrieval and update. The system 
will feature a secure login for salespersons and inventory managers. At the warehouse, the inven- 
tory application will manage the available goods and resources. At the billing counter, the applica- 
tion will have the ability to create bills along with proper discount and tax evaluations. 
Authentication – Login: This will allow inventory managers and salespersons to log in to the system. 
Change Password: This will allow inventory managers and salespersons to change the password. 
Add Goods: This will allow adding goods and their corresponding details to the current inventory. 
Remove Goods: This will allow removing goods from the current inventory. 
Place Order: This will allow placing a wholesale order to the supplier. 
Invoice Generation: This will allow generating an invoice for the order request to the supplier. 
Search Item: This will allow searching the item details in the current inventory. 
Receipt Generation: This will generate a bill for the customer selected items from the inventory. 
Discount and Tax Generation: This will calculate the discount and tax based on the quantity 
selected by the customer. 
Replace Item: This will replace the item in the current inventory. 
Cancel Receipt: This will cancel the currently generated receipt. 
Price Updating: This will update the price details of the corresponding item. 
Customer Request: This will log an item request from the customer. 
View Summary Report: This will generate the summary report for all the transactions that 
have taken place. 
Expired Goods: This will notify about the removal of goods from the current inventory. 
 
Original Diagram Screenshot 
