Example 06 
Domain: E-Province​
Book: UML Diagramming A Case Study Approach by Suriya Sundaramoorthy  (Page 95) 
Original Requirement  
Citizens in every district face the difficulty with the of government certificates like birth/death 
certificates, income and caste certificates, old age and widow pensions, etc. This can be done with 
e-Province. This case study demonstrates how make the government services available to the citi- 
zens in a convenient, efficient and transparent manner, by enabling it simple by reliable access over 
the Internet. The main objective is to bring the public services closer to the citizens. To fulfil the 
vision of providing an easy and convenient service to the citizens through remote access primar- 
ily through Common Service Centre (CSCs), e-Province project is created. This case study aims 
to develop a State Portal (SP) to provide all the citizens of the respective province to access the 
services under a single interface mechanism in the form of the Portal. The various modules in the 
e-Province project are an Admin module that creates, updates, deactivates the users and performs 
various other tasks. A Login module that allows the users to login with their unique Application 
number with approved status. A User module that allows the approved users to register for the 
respective certificates. A User Profile module that creates the pre-requisite information of the user 
that needs to be stored in the database. The Certificate module contains the required forms that 
are to be filled with the information of the users (Figures 7.1–7.8). 
1. Registration Process 
Description: This process allows new users to the register to e-Province Website online 
and verify the account once the user is verified. 
Flow of Events 
Basic Flow: Registering to the e-Province and creating the unique ID in which the data are 
stored in the e-Province database. 
Pre-Conditions: Users should possess the prerequisites (e.g. Voter ID and Aadhaar card) for 
registering. 
Post-Conditions: The details are uploaded to the database and the user is provided with a 
unique ID. 
2. Login Process 
Description: This process allows the authorized users to login to the website using their 
unique ID. 
Flow of Events 
Basic Flow: Login with the verified unique ID. 
Alternative Flow: If the unique ID is not present in the database, it shows an error 
message. 
Pre-Conditions: User should possess the verified unique ID. 
Post-Conditions: Logged in Successfully. 
3. Registration for Certificate Process 
Description: This process creates the forms for the required certificate that the user has 
requested and when the users filled the details with the valid prerequisites, the registration 
for certificate process completes. 
Flow of Events 
Basic Flow: The user can provide the details of the required certificate that is requested by 
him, and the data are stored in e-Province database for further process. 
